# SAR-AI

The OPS-SAT Space Lab is Europe's first publicly accessible hardware/software experimentation platform in Low Earth Orbit (LEO). Launched by European Space Agency (ESA) in 2019, the 3U spacecraft is open to both new and seasoned players in the New Space domain to test out advanced concepts on an orbiting satellite with a range of advanced payloads. The work presented in this paper builds upon a previous in-orbit demonstration which used open-source Digital Signal Processing (DSP) techniques to perform direct in-orbit processing of transmissions from maritime and aeronautical emergency beacons, making it the first software defined and reconfigurable Search and Rescue (SAR) transponder deployed on a satellite in a Linux environment.

The experiment has opened a new chapter in operations for reconfigurable Software Defined Radio (SDR) and other Radio Frequency (RF) payloads to support multi-purpose missions. Lessons learned from past OPS-SAT experiments that applied Machine Learning (ML) for image classification with Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) are applied in the context RF signal processing. These methodologies can be used for other types of data such as complex In-Phase (I) and Quadrature (Q) samples acquired from the spacecraft's SDR.

The [previous SDR experiment on OPS-SAT](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9684957) uses a CPU intensive application to perform blind DSP of the In-Phase and Quadrature (IQ) samples to demodulate terrestrial emergency transmissions. In this work an object detection model is trained and used to improve beacon recovery and decoding from RF spectrograms rendered on-board the spacecraft from raw IQ data acquired by the SDR. The ML estimations are used to perform narrowband filtering and interference suppression which leads to a significant increase in the beacons that are able to be decoded compared to blind Phase Locked Loop (PLL) search. This follow-on experiment combines the recent advances of deploying RF DSP applications on OPS-SAT with the successes of past ML experiments with the intention of improving operational efficiency and autonomy of data collection operations with the spacecraft's various payloads.
